---
layout: page
title: "Math 1316:  (Spring 2022)"
permalink: /teaching/2022/math1316/
---

* See [here]({{ page.url }}syllabus) for the syllabus.



Announcements
-------------

* [Here]({{ page.url }}s5.pdf) is a sample word problem to give you an idea what you should know with applications for sine/cosine waves.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws4-12.pdf) is the worksheet for 4/12.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws4-7.pdf) is the worksheet for 4/7.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws4-5.pdf) is the worksheet for 4/5. The Desmos online graphing calculator is [here](https://desmos.com/calculator).

* Here is the schedule for the final exam:

    * Section 06 (8:00): Tuesday, May 10, 8:00–10:00
	
	* Section 07 (12:30): Monday, May 9, 3:00–5:00
	
	* Section 08 (2:00): Friday, May 6, 12:45–2:45


* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws3-29.pdf) is the worksheet for 3/29.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws3-24.pdf) is the worksheet for 3/24.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws3-22.pdf) is the worksheet for 3/22.

* The study guide for the midterm is [here]({{ page.url }}msg.pdf).

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws2-24.pdf) is the worksheet for 2/24.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws2-15.pdf) is the worksheet for 2/15.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws2-10.pdf) is the worksheet for 2/10.

* Due to weather, SHSU canceled classes for the afternoon of Thursday 2/3. This affected the schedule, and I've updated the below schedule to accont for the changes. As per usual, quizzes are still on the last day of the module; that's just now a Tuesday for a couple modules.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws1-27.pdf) is the worksheet for 1/27.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}ws1-25.pdf) is the worksheet for 1/25. This is not being submitted for a grade; it is problems for you to work on together in class.



Schedule
--------

This course is organized into seven two-week modules. 

* Module 0 (1/13–1/20): **Geometry Review.** Length and area, similar and congruent shapes. 

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: N/A; McKeague: N/A.

* Module 1 (1/25–2/8): **Trigonometry of Right Triangles.** Degree measure of angles, the six trig functions, solving right triangles.

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: 7.1, 7.2, 7.4; McKeague: 1.1, 1.3, 2.1–2.3.

* Module 2 (2/10–2/22): **Trigonometry and Non-Right Triangles.** The laws of sines and cosines, finding areas of triangles.

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: 7.3, 10.1, 10.2; McKeague: 7.1–7.4.

* Module 3 (2/24–3/3): **Applications of Trigonometry and Triangles.** Surveying, vectors.

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: 10.8; McKeague: 2.4, 2.5.

* Review and Midterm (3/8–3/10)

* *Spring Break!* (3/14–3/18)

* Module 4 (3/22–3/31): **Trigonometry, Circles, and Radians.** Radian measure of angles, the unit circle definition of trig functions.

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: 7.1, 7.3; McKeague: 3.1–3.4.

* Module 5 (4/5–4/14): **Trigonometric Functions.** Graphs of trig functions, inverse trig functions.

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: 8.1–8.3; McKeague: 4.1–4.5, 4.7.

* Module 6 (4/19–4/28): **Trigonometric Identities.** Solving trig equations, angle-sum and double-angle identities.

    * *Corresponding textbook sections.* OpenStax: 9.1–9.3; McKeague: 5.1–5.3.

* Review and Final (5/3–5/11)
