---
layout: page
title: "Math 1410:  (Fall 2022)"
permalink: /teaching/2022/math1410/
---

* See [here]({{ page.url }}syllabus) for the syllabus.



Announcements
-------------

* [Here]({{ page.url }}e3answers.pdf) is an answer key for midterm 3.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}sg3.pdf) is a study guide for midterm 3. For sample questions, the exam questions are written to be similar to what you have seen from online homework, so I encourage you to look at homework questions for examples of problems.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}q3answers.pdf) is an answer key for quiz 3.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}e2answers.pdf) is an answer key for midterm 2.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}sg2.pdf) is a study guide for midterm 2. For sample questions, the exam questions are written to be similar to what you have seen from online homework, so I encourage you to look at homework questions for examples of problems.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}q2answers.pdf) is an answer key for quiz 2, for you to check your work against.


* [Here]({{ page.url }}e1answers.pdf) is an answer key for midterm 1.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}sg1.pdf) is a study guide for midterm 1. For sample questions, the exam questions are written to be similar to what you have seen from online homework, so I encourage you to look at homework questions for examples of problems.

* [Here]({{ page.url }}q1answers.pdf) is an answer key for quiz 1, for you to check your work against.


Schedule
--------

Important Dates!

* Thursday, September 1: Quiz 1

* Thursday, September 15: Unit 1 Midterm

* Thursday & Friday, September 29, 30: Retake for Unit 1 Midterm

* Monday, October 3: Quiz 2

* Thursday, October 13: Unit 2 Midterm

* Thursday & Friday, October 27, 28: Retake for Unit 2 Midterm

* Monday, October 31: Quiz 3

* Thursday, November 10: Unit 3 Midterm

* *Retake for Unit 3 Midterm TBA*

* Monday, November 28: Quiz 4

* Thursday, December 8: Final Exam (8:00–10:00)

The course is divided into multiweek units, each culminating in an exam. Each unit is broken up into week-long modules. For units 1, 2, and 3, the exam is on the Thursday of the last week of the unit. For unit 4, the exam is the cumulative final during the finals period. Quizzes happen on the Thursday of the second week of the module.

* Unit 1

    * Module 1: Introduction to Functions
	
    * Module 2: More about Functions
	
    * Module 3: Quadratic Functions
	
    * Module 4: More about Quadratic Functions
	
* Unit 2

    * Module 5: Power Functions
	
    * Module 6: Polynomial Functions
	
    * Module 7: Rational Functions
	
    * Module 8: More on Rational Functions
	
* Unit 3 (the trig unit)

    * Module 9: Definitions of Trig Functions
	
	* Module 10: Graphs of Trig Functions
	
	* Module 11: Solving Trig Equations
	
    * Module 12: Trig Identities
	
* Unit 4

    * Module 13: Exponential Functions
	
    * Module 14: Logarithmic Functions
	
	
	
