---layout: pagetitle: "Inner mantles and iterated HOD"permalink: /research/talks/2019-may-asl/excerpt: "This is a contributed talk at the 2019 ASL Annual North American Meeting on Tuesday, 21 May 2019. It is about joint work with Jonas Reitz. An inner model $W \subseteq V$ is a *ground* if $V$ is a forcing extension of $W$ via a forcing notion $\mathbb{P} \in W$. The intersection of all the grounds is called the *mantle*, and it is the largest set-forcing-invariant inner model..."---This is a contributed talk at the [2019 ASL Annual North American Meeting](https://asl2019.commons.gc.cuny.edu/) on Tuesday, 21 May 2019. It is about joint work with Jonas Reitz.An inner model $W \subseteq V$ is a *ground* if $V$ is a forcing extension of $W$ via a forcing notion $\mathbb{P} \in W$. The intersection of all the grounds is called the *mantle*, and it is the largest set-forcing-invariant inner model. Fuchs, Hamkins, and Reitz \cite{FuchsHamkinsReitz2015:Set-theoreticGeology} showed that there is a class forcing notion which forces the ground model to be the mantle of the extension. In that same article, they defined the sequence of \emph{inner mantles}, obtained by iterated the definition of the mantle to get the mantle of the mantle, the mantle of the mantle of the mantle, and so on, and conjectured that there is a class forcing to force the ground model to be the $\eta$-th inner mantle of the extension for any ordinal $\eta$.We answer their conjecture in the positive. We present a class forcing notion $\mathbb{M}(\eta)$, uniformly definable for ordinals $\eta$, which forces the ground model to be the $\eta$-th inner mantle of the extension, in which the sequence of inner mantles has length at least $\eta$. We also show that $\mathbb{M}(\eta)$ forces the ground model to be the $\eta$-th iterated $\mathrm{HOD}$ of the extension, where the sequence of iterated $\mathrm{HOD}$s has length at least $\eta$. Finally, we show that the lengths of the sequences of inner mantles and of iterated $\mathrm{HOD}$s can be separated to be any two ordinals you please. \begin{thebibliography}{10}\bibitem{FuchsHamkinsReitz2015:Set-theoreticGeology}{\scshape Gunter Fuchs, Joel David Hamkins, and Jonas Reitz},{\itshape Set-theoretic geology},{\bfseries\itshape Annals of Pure and Applied Logic}vol.~166 (2015), no.~4, pp.~464--501.\end{thebibliography}\vspace*{-0.5\baselineskip}% this space adjustment is usually necessary after a bibliography\end{document}%% READ ME%% READ ME%% READ MEINSTRUCTIONS FOR SUPPLYING INFORMATION IN THE CORRECT FORMAT: 1. Author names are listed as First Last, First Last, and First Last.\absauth{FirstName1 LastName1, FirstName2 LastName2, and FirstName3 LastName3}2. Titles of abstracts have ONLY the first letter capitalized,except for Proper Nouns.\meettitle{Title of abstract with initial capital letter only, except forProper Nouns} 3. Affiliations and email addresses for authors of abstracts are  listed separately.% First author's affiliation\affil{Department, University, Street Address, Country}\meetemail{First author's email}%%% NOTE: email required for at least one author\urladdr{OPTIONAL}%% Second author's affiliation\affil{Department, University, Street Address, Country}\meetemail{Second author's email}\urladdr{OPTIONAL}%% Third author's affiliation\affil{Department, University, Street Address, Country}% Second author's email\meetemail{Third author's email}\urladdr{OPTIONAL}4. Bibliographic Entries%%%% IF references are submitted with abstract,%%%% please use the following formats%%% For a Journal article\bibitem{cite1}{\scshape Author's Name},{\itshape Title of article},{\bfseries\itshape Journal name spelled out, no abbreviations},vol.~XX (XXXX), no.~X, pp.~XXX--XXX.%%% For a Journal article by the same authors as above,%%% i.e., authors in cite1 are the same for cite2\bibitem{cite2}\bysame{\itshape Title of article},{\bfseries\itshape Journal},vol.~XX (XXXX), no.~X, pp.~XX--XXX.%%% For a book\bibitem{cite3}{\scshape Author's Name},{\bfseries\itshape Title of book},Name of series,Publisher,Year.%%% For an article in proceedings\bibitem{cite4}{\scshape Author's Name},{\itshape Title of article},{\bfseries\itshape Name of proceedings}(Address of meeting),(First Last and First2 Last2, editors),vol.~X,Publisher,Year,pp.~X--XX.%%% For an article in a collection\bibitem{cite5}{\scshape Author's Name},{\itshape Title of article},{\bfseries\itshape Book title}(First Last and First2 Last2, editors),Publisher,Publisher's address,Year,pp.~X--XX.%%% An edited book\bibitem{cite6}Author's name, editor. % No special font used here{\bfseries\itshape Title of book},Publisher,Publisher's address,Year.